who has already signed up to canvas.
[Music]
>> So, what I am staring at is a line of
people waiting to get inside Zoran
Mamani's
campaign rally here in Washington
Heights. It's now 6:00 p.m. on Monday
night, October 13th. It's hard to
explain just how big this line is. It
literally spans three and a half blocks
and it is dense. And we are going to
talk to people in this line and inside
this rally about what it is Manny means
to them.
>> Let's go.
>> We're from the show called The Daily.
>> Oh, hello.
>> Hi. And we're just going to ask people
in a word what Mandonni means to you,
what he represents.
>> One word.
>> Yeah, why not?
>> Compassion. Honest person.
>> He's real.
>> He's brown and I'm brown.
>> That simple.
>> Yeah.
>> Hope.
>> Hope. My first choice would be hope and
then the future.
>> I think he is a fresh and actual change
in the party.
>> I'm 16 years old and from what I've
heard.
>> Um, no I can't. But I've been
volunteering under Zoron and apparently
according to adults it's really rare to
be like happy or excited about a
politician. So you know this is kind of
a once in a lifetime thing.
>> I'm here cuz um actually my son turned
me to saw him. I didn't know anything
about him. I was talking to him one day.
I said, you know, I may just vote for
Cuomo because I thought it was Cuomo and
Adam.
>> Yeah.
>> He's like, you didn't hear about
Storeand. And I said, uh, no. He sent me
a couple of videos and I like what he
had to offer.
>> So much so that you're here at his
rally.
>> Yes. And I've been canvasing for him
actually the past three weeks. So,
>> we're also very excited about his
position about Palestine and what's
going on. I'm an anti-ionist Jewish girl
and I think it's really important that
people see that perspective, right? Like
>> finally some movement away from centrist
pandering to oligarchic fascists. Not to
put too fine a point on it,
>> a rather fine point. I just feel like
it's very necessary for us to have
places in this country that are very
openly progressive and are not bending
to the will of what the president wants
and what he represents.
>> As a workingclass person, this is very
exciting moment for us. Someone thinking
about us, someone commit to working for
us.
>> We're about to raise a family. We don't
want to be priced out. I've
>> You're pregnant.
>> Very much so.
>> How many months?
>> Eight. I mean, I don't want to be
presumptuous, but free child care for
all.
>> We were just talking about that to you
as well.
>> It very much is. Yeah.
>> Doran to help us freeze the rent,
>> faster buses.
>> He's going to get free buses,
>> put cheaper groceries,
>> grocery cheaper, and child care
>> and help families.
>> All right. Wow. Thank you for your help.
>> People know this platform like they know
the back of their hands.
>> Ladies and gentlemen, come on down. Come
on in.
And now we go to security.
>> They'll check you in.
>> So, we're inside this auditorium now,
which has a capacity of about 3,500
people, and it very much feels like it's
at capacity.
>> I need to for the next mayor of the city
of New York, Zoron.
>> After a very long wind up and a bunch of
introductory speeches, Mandani is now
finally taking the stage.
[Applause]
Billionaires like Bill Aman and Ronald
Lauder have poured
millions of dollars into this race
because they say that we pose an
existential threat.
And I am here to admit something.
They are right.
Fundamental change only comes from the
courage to turn your back on the old
formulas.
>> The courage to invent the future
>> together. That is exactly what we have
done. Because for all those who say
our time is coming,
>> my friends,
our time is now.
[Music]
Okay, so the rally is now over. The
crowd is spilling out onto the streets
of Washington Heights and the next stop
for us is Mamani's campaign headquarters
in Manhattan where we are going to sit
down with him for an interview. From the
New York Times, I'm Michael Barbaro.
This is the daily. Today, Zoron Mandani
on the movement he's created in New York
City, his critique of the Democratic
Party,
his courtship of those he has alienated
with his campaign so far, and his plans
to stand up to Donald Trump. It's
Thursday, October 16th.
[Music]
Hello.
>> Hey, we're here to go to the Mandani
campaign headquarters. How's this going?
Can they come?
>> Yeah.
>> Oh, they'll come pick us up. Okay, I'll
text them. You're welcome.
>> Oh, there's Assemblyman. Nani.
>> Hello. How are you?
>> Hello. How's it going? Pleasure to meet
you. It's such a pleasure.
>> Hi,
>> Aa. Nice to meet you.
Do
>> you mind helping me?
The
>> third floor, which we sometimes stop at,
has these Halloween decorations that
always take you a little bit of back.
>> Is this Is this your office?
>> Yeah.
>> Okay.
>> Oh, wow.
>> To call it modest
>> would be an injustice to the word
modest.
>> Modest is
>> Yeah, you can sit in that chair.
>> The recliner.
Okay, we're going. Um,
Assemblyman,
do people call you Assemblyman?
>> Some people do. You can you can call me
Zoran.
>> That's a little familiar. Um,
Assemblyman Mandani, thank you for
making time for us and thank you for
inviting us to your rally last night.
>> You're very welcome. It's a pleasure to
be here. So, you sit, according to the
polls, including our own at the times,
on the cusp of a historic political
victory, because at the age of well,
you're now 33, but you'll be 34 just a
couple days after this runs.
You would be the youngest mayor in a
century. You'd be New York City's first
Muslim mayor. You'd be its first
Democratic Socialist mayor.
>> Well, I I wouldn't actually be the first
Democratic socialist mayor.
>> Who would it be? David Dinkens was also
a member of the Democratic Socialist. A
co-member of the Democratic Party on the
right. Is that it?
>> Well, he was a member of DSA, identified
also as a Democratic Socialist.
>> Interesting. Thank you for the Thank you
for the correction. Unaware.
>> You'd be the second Democratic Socialist
mayor after David Dinkens. And I'd like
for this conversation to trace the arc
of how you got to this moment, the
forces, the ideas that made you the
candidate that first got into this race,
the style of the campaign that
transformed you from being, I think it's
safe to say, virtually unknown into the
winner of the primary for the Democratic
nomination, and the way since that you
have tried to broaden your appeal,
answer your skeptics in this general
election, and finally, of course, what
it will look like if you do become
mayor. And somehow we're going to do
that in an hour. You grew up the son of
a well-known filmmaker. Your mother
directed Denzel Washington. Even
>> Mississippi Masala.
>> Mississippi Masala. Your father was a
college professor who studied among
other things apartheid and genocide.
>> As a young man, you become a college
activist. You're focused on
progressive politics. And when you
graduate from college and start your
career in the progressive world, you
start to identify not as a Democrat, but
as a member of the Democratic Socialists
of America. And given your bio, being a
Democrat feels like it would have been a
pretty natural home. So just let me
start by asking about what went into
that decision, what you were embracing
and what you were rejecting in that
identification. So I I wouldn't describe
those two identities as mutually
exclusive. I think that one can live
within the other. Meaning that I am both
a democratic socialist and I'm also a
democrat. One is a description of my
political ideology. The other is a
description of the party that I belong
to.
>> DSA being the ideology,
>> democratic socialism being the ideology,
DSA being an organization, the
Democratic Party being the party. And it
was Bernie Sanders's run in 2016 that
gave me the language of democratic
socialism to describe my own politics.
It took what I had thought were
disperate ideas and cohered them and
gave me an understanding of what that
politics was and also what a larger
movement looked like of people who also
were animated by that same focus on
dignity on the unacceptable nature of
income inequality across this country.
And to me, what democratic socialism
means is a belief that it is
government's job to ensure that every
person is living a life of dignity.
>> And dignity is not the things that you'd
like. It's not the things that you'd
want. It's the things that you need. And
there's a general common sense around
many of those things. You know, in New
York City, in this country, we'd say
that every child deserves public
education that's free point of service
of K through 12. But we also think that
it's okay to be priced out of the
education you need prior to that. Child
care.
>> And for some reason, there's a point at
which you should deserve education. Then
there's a point before that at which it
depends on your family's ability to pay.
>> Right. And it's somewhat arbitrary.
>> Yes. And the ability to pay is not a
nominal amount. We're talking about an
average generally of $22,500
a year for a 3-year-old or a
four-year-old or a 2-year-old. And so to
me, what democratic socialism is the the
fulfillment of the ideal that underpins
things that already exist within our
society but are currently being applied
in either a partial manner or not at
all. So democratic socialism gives you a
vocabulary to identify those injustices,
those inequities and say
they don't need to be. And it teaches me
that the way I feel about housing and
the way I feel about public transit and
the way I feel about child care, these
are not different opinions necessarily.
They are in fact rooted in the same
understanding of the world we should be
living in. Democrats talk about many of
the things that you just identified have
for quite some time, right? Childare,
healthcare, affordability.
And I think it's fair to say
that, and this I think was on display at
your rally last night, that you have
some real objections to the way
traditional Democrats have operated. And
I want to get to the heart of that where
you think the distinction lies between
the problems you're identifying and want
to solve the vision for solving it and
what the existing Democratic parties
view of those things are because you
don't mince words about old ways, old
formulas
and a kind of sclerotic democratic party
that you see your movement as not just
changing but maybe fully replacing.
You know, in this race right now, it's
easy to view
one of my opponents, Andrew Cuomo,
through the
>> former governor, y
>> caricature that he is creating of
himself.
But prior to this moment, he was
considered by many to be a leader in the
Democratic party,
>> one of the most prominent Democrats to
emerge from this state. at a point
someone that people were speaking about
as
a politician who should run for
president of this country.
>> I remember
>> and he is an example of so much of what
has disappointed so many about our party
because
for for all that he is today, there have
been examples of this in years past. And
these these were the very things that we
would overlook or we would simply see as
parts of what politics had to be.
>> Yeah. Get specific about it if you don't
mind
>> because I think there are plent there
are plenty of New Yorkers who see an
Andrew Cuomo putting aside which for
many is impossible the allegations of
sexual misconduct.
>> A governor who used his platform to
remake Lagori airport to build Moahan
Station. we just went through it to pass
gay marriage who used the Democratic
party and its values to create pretty
substantial change.
And he's the same governor who ensured
that there would be Republican power in
Albany such that the only progress that
would be made was that which he was
willing to accept. Many of the same
achievements that are accredited to him
are the ones that he was initially an
obstacle towards before becoming seen as
the architect of. Thinking about this as
the same person who cut funding for a
program called Advantage that was
providing millions of dollars in
connecting homeless New Yorkers with
apartments that they could live in. M
>> and I actually met a woman right here in
New York City who had just been approved
to that program right before the funding
was cut. And the cutting of that funding
was one that then pushed her out of the
apartment that she was able to rent.
>> This is the same governor who gave Elon
Musk $959 million in tax credits
>> in New York.
>> In New York. I say these things because
sometimes it's tempting to think that
all that is wrong in this moment is from
Donald Trump. But it's important that
the very same people that we have
villainized and thought of solely
through the prism of Trump existed prior
to him and in fact were some of the very
people that were uplifted by these kinds
of leaders within the Democratic party.
If you want to understand why so many
have come to associate politics with a
extended play of diminishing faith and
trust. Then we also have to understand
who the politicians have been that have
been leading these very parties and that
many of these issues are not exclusive
to the Republican party. They are in
fact endemic within our own party. And
if we want to truly move beyond Donald
Trump, we also have to understand the
systems that allowed for the flourishing
of someone like Donald Trump and that
many of those systems and styles of
politics are also within our own party
and Andrew Cuomo being an example of the
fusion of these things. So just to
distill this critique, Democrats like
Cuomo make big progressive promises.
When the rubber meets the road in your
mind, they will cave to the other side,
to the elites, to the donor class. They
ultimately disappoint on questions like
affordability
and you're saying you will not you will
not do that. You will not disappoint.
>> Yes,
>> that's the idea.
>> Yes.
Why do you think that they make
compromises that you,
not yet mayor, not governor, um, and not
having to work with the other side are
so certain you will never make?
>> I've heard about these pauses.
>> It's interesting. Well, you think
>> it's interesting to hear you say the
word the other side. Part of my point is
that Andrew Cuomo created the other side
in Albany. He took what would have
otherwise been a democratic trifecta of
Democratic control of the governor's
office, the Assembly, and the state
senate and ensured that there was a
Republican minority in the Senate that
was in power. We're talking a little bit
inside baseball, but in New York, Andrew
Cuomo almost
>> needed, wanted, benefited from
>> a diffusion of power that kept the
Democratic and frankly the progressives
in New York in check.
>> Exactly. And I I share this example.
>> It's almost like you spent some time in
Alb
>> as as inside baseball as it is,
>> but I think that's clearly because he
feared an unchecked left or a left that
would actually be able to deliver. And
God forbid an unchecked left that was
able to fulfill the aspirations of
working people. And I say this because
governing will necessitate compromise.
There's no question about that. Some of
the compromises that have been made,
however, are not the ones that are
actually innate to these positions and
to this politics. Some of them have
actually been created as a means by
which to ensure that we could never
fulfill the ideals that have brought so
many to politics. And the reason I am
confident in my ability to deliver on
what we have campaigned on is because of
the fact one that we have campaigned on
a very specific set of commitments. I
would argue that far more than many
other campaigns New Yorkers know exactly
what it is that I'm running on. I'll
have people stop me in the street and
just shout fast and free buses or
universal childare or freeze the rent.
>> Yeah. And that means that we're building
a movement not around an individual but
rather around these policy commitments.
And that is what we will be held to
account for. And that is something that
I want because in order to bring people
back to politics, in order to bring
people's faith back to the idea that
government could actually make their
lives easier, we have to be honest about
what it is we're fighting for, who we're
fighting for, and then to deliver on
those very things. I want to go back for
just a moment to a timeline when you're
kind of working your way from
progressive causes into politics.
Clearly, you've been you're inspired at
this phase by Senator Bernie Sanders,
this movement, this campaign he's
created.
You run for state assembly in 2020, a
really big year in American
civil discourse, politics, and I wonder
if you'd agree with this. It it feels to
me looking back at that period
that you're very much straddling the
line still between an activist political
candidate. People who may someday run
for mayor of New York City, for
instance, tend not to go on social media
and write things. And you know this
tweet and I know it gets brought up. I
think it's fair game when you wrote in
2020, "We don't need an investigation to
know that the NYPD is racist, anti-quer,
a major threat to public safety.
You call for defunding the NYPD.
People who think they may run for mayor
tend not to describe themselves ever as
anti-Zionists. Those things in the past
would be seen potentially as
disqualifying.
That clearly didn't happen in this case
with you. But I am curious what prompted
you to express those views, especially
about the police at that time. You know,
I moved to New York City when I was 7
years old. This is where I grew up. And
one of the things that I would think
about often was the necessity of safety
and justice. And growing up meant
learning about the moments in which the
chasm between those things
felt as if it was only continuing to
expand. M
>> learning about the Central Park 5,
growing up in the city and reading about
>> the wrongly convicted
>> alleged
>> exonerated five.
>> Yep.
>> Growing up and reading about Shawn Bell,
Eric Garner.
>> Yeah. These are victims of
>> police brutality.
>> Police brutality in the city.
>> Reading about Michael Brown.
And then in 2020 in the year that the
tweet is written, the murder of George
Floyd.
>> Mhm.
>> And feeling like this chasm was at the
largest I'd seen it in my own life and
struggling with how far apart it felt.
and in the time since then becoming an
assembly member representing about
130,000 people in northwest Queens
historia and Long Island City
and learning that to deliver that
justice doesn't mean to do so in
isolation. It means to still fulfill
these twin necessities of safety and
justice. And doing so means working with
police officers who put their lives on
the line every single day, representing
Muslim New Yorkers in the district that
I represent who were illegally surveiled
on the basis of their faith, going so
far as even to be watched when they
played soccer.
>> Mhm.
>> And the black and brown New Yorkers
who've been victims of police brutality.
It means representing all of the 8 and a
half million people of this city and
understanding the necessities of doing
so while delivering safety and justice
and understanding that no one thing can
be or should be pursued without the
other. Let me let me fast forward a
little bit to June, the primary, where
you blow everyone away, all your
opponents. And it seems like even on the
night of that victory, you start to
confront those who are skeptical of you
and who you want to win over. And since
we were just talking about police, let's
talk about what you have said since the
primary victory. I think it was actually
at the times where my colleagues asked
you about how you're going to be
thinking about the police and and I was
struck that you said you were prepared
to apologize to the NYPD for some of the
things you had said defund the
allegation that
the department is racist.
Given what you just said about the
experiences you recollect, why issue
that apology and what would the apology
even be? The issuing of it is to reckon
with the fact that it's language that
I'm applying to officers
>> when in fact what I'm speaking about are
specific practices. And when I've met
officers, not only over the course of
being an assembly person, but also
running for mayor, understanding that
behind every caricature, behind every
headline is a New Yorker trying to do
their best.
and those meetings, those conversations,
those are some of the ones I've
appreciated the most where I've shared
an apology for the language that I've
used and a desire to continue to fulfill
those same ideals of safety and of
justice and to do so together. Are you
apologizing for the language or for the
thinking behind it? And I don't I'm not
trying to be academic about this, but do
you still think that the NYPD as an
institution is racist?
>> No. And and I'm what I'm apologizing is
for the language that I've used and also
doing so as someone who is cleareyed
about the necessity
of still fulfilling those two things.
>> Mhm. Let me turn to the rest of your
outreach which has been really striking.
I mean, let's turn to developers and to
frankly the super rich in New York and
business leaders. You've been openly
skeptical of the role of developers. For
example, you have said you don't think
billionaires should exist. Last night at
your rally, you said that your movement
is an existential threat to billionaires
>> who think that they can buy an election.
>> Full quote.
>> You got to you got to
>> you got to fill the you got to You're
right. You can't do the
>> accurately. That's what I wrote down.
Maybe I missed the full sense. Um,
and you would like to increase taxes on
those making over a million dollars a
year to pay for things like the the
three big promises
>> by 2%. And yet you're meeting with many
of these people at their offices, at
their homes in some cases. What have you
said to those leaders in your meetings
with them? And what have they said to
you?
I've said many of the same things that
I'm saying at these rallies, out on the
street, in these conversations, which is
that I continue to believe that
two of the most straightforward and
productive ways to raise revenue to fund
a significant part of our affordability
agenda and the need to trump the city
are by, as you said,
>> Trump proof, we'll get back to that.
>> Yes. are by increasing personal income
taxes on the top 1% of New Yorkers. New
Yorkers make a million dollars a year or
more by 2%. And by increasing the
state's top corporate tax rate from
7.25% to match that of New Jersey,
11.5%.
The socialist utopia
>> of New Jersey.
>> Socialist utopia of New Jersey.
>> Yes. Um,
>> you were joking about that, just to be
clear.
And what I've appreciated about these
conversations is that everyone knows
exactly where I stand on these fiscal
policies.
>> And I'm looking to have a conversation
both about why I believe in these fiscal
policies, but also that a disagreement
on those policies should not preclude us
from looking for agreements elsewhere. I
mean, it feels like what you're saying
to these business leaders is, look, I'm
going to be making changes to the
system, but I'm not turning New York
City, this center of American
capitalism, into a socialist utopia. If
I if I'm kind of hearing you correctly,
>> I'm I'm and I'm
>> Let me just get specific about about
about a particular policy and I want to
understand your fidelity to it.
>> The idea of what is being called a
millionaire's tax, 2% tax on income over
a million dollars, which is which feels
very central to your agenda, felt very
integral to the campaign in the primary.
Since the primary, my sense, please
correct me if I'm wrong, is that you've
expressed an openness, and I don't know
if this flowed from your conversations
with business leaders to fund your
agenda
outside of that kind of attacks. And and
you know this, and our listeners may not
as well, New York and New York City are
funky. The governor and the state
legislature control all taxes, but
property tax. And the two taxes you just
mentioned therefore require the
participation of the governor who says
she does not want to participate in
these so far and the state legislature.
So you seem to now be saying it doesn't
necessarily matter where the money comes
from.
But for democratic socialists and for
this agenda that you are an avatar of,
isn't taxing the rich more
as a principle important? Isn't the
method here important or are you being
more pragmatic about it?
>> If you look at the chronology of the
campaign,
the first thing we speak about is what
we are looking to fund.
>> October 23rd when we launched the
campaign, we talk about freezing the
rent for rent stabilized tenants, making
buses fast and free, delivering
universal childare. The most important
thing is always the policies themselves.
And I continue to believe as a principle
that it's important to have a fair
system of taxation. And I do not think
the one that we have is an example of
that. And to me, it is always and has
always been the case that far more
important than the means by which you
fund something is the fact that you are
in fact funding it. And so I still think
that these two tax proposals are the
most straightforward and productive ways
to do so. There are other revenue
proposals that also exist that have been
put forward. There's also the fact that
I have sat in Albany year after year
>> and watched
>> and watched as we've been told the
receipts we estimated they're actually
going to be bigger this year than we
thought. And if there is a proposal that
the $4 billion we would raise from one
of these taxes from the personal income
tax increase can be found elsewhere, I'm
not going to fight to bring it back to
the original means that I suggested. I'm
going to fight to ensure that that $4
billion is then used to fund a
significant portion of universal
childare. And I think that always has to
be what drives us, that we are funding
the affordability agenda, not the
question of how. And I do believe these
are the two most straightforward ways to
do so.
>> Right. So the method does matter, but it
doesn't have to be
this method that gets there. I mean, it
it does strike me that you're already
starting to confront some of the
challenges that
when you talk about Cuomo, you found
distasteful, which is, you know, you're
dealing with a Democratic governor who
isn't on the same page with you. And
that's that's an immediate kind of like
>> old versus DSA mom donnie.
>> I would contrast governor with with
Governor Cuomo in that Cuomo
almost made it his mission to go to war
with New York City.
>> Mhm.
>> He would cut so much of what he could
find in what the state was funding
across these five burrows. And when Bill
Delasio ran on a promise of universal
prek and the necessity of working with
Albany to find the funding for that
program, Governor Cuomo was one of the
chief obstacles to it.
>> Right.
>> And what I found is that though Governor
Hokll and I have a disagreement as to
the necessity of taxing the wealthiest
New Yorkers, the most profitable
corporations, we have a clear agreement
on the importance of universal childare.
And to me that is the kind of agreement
that was missing under the previous
leader of the state because so often he
was the obstacle to any affirmative
vision of what government could be doing
for working people. Then there's the
Jewish community as we as we kind of
tick through the folks that you have
been meeting with and you end up in
rooms where people have been challenging
you directly sometimes emotionally is my
sense. I'm thinking about Dr. Albert
Borilla, CEO of Fizer, our colleagues,
reported on your conversation with him.
He's the son of Holocaust survivors, and
he pleads with you to stop calling
what's been happening in Gaza up until
now there's now a ceasefire a genocide,
which is what you call it, and he pushed
for you to condemn this phrase
globalizing and tifata because in his
mind, it raises a spectre of violence
against Jews. My sense is that in these
conversations you've you've given some
ground on things like Koblies and Tifat
not on genocide
and I wonder what you've come to
understand about the perspective of
people like Dr. Bura and and Jews in
general in New York who are in the same
way perhaps that police were grappling
with what you were saying about them
grappling with the way you talk about
Israel.
I would distinguish one piece in that my
use of the term genocide is not
a personal opinion rather it's a
reflection of findings by
institutions even of genocide scholars
themselves institutions like the United
Nations
and
it is a word that reflects what has been
happening in Gaza
And
these conversations that I've been
having both since the primary, but also
frankly prior to the primary,
have been illuminating for me in both
having an opportunity to meet many New
Yorkers, especially Jewish New Yorkers,
for whom their only impression of me was
through a caricature, whether it be a
caricature.
>> What was that caricature, do you think?
Well, you know, I had the distinct
pleasure of having around $30 million
spent against me in the primary, and it
was $30 million that was spent in
mailers, in TV ads.
>> I saw some of those mailers. They were
some of them were rather vivid.
>> There there was a mailer sent by Andrew
Cuomo super PAC that artificially
lengthened my beard.
And there was another mailer sent by
another candidate.
>> So So that you were more menacingly
>> Yes.
>> something. and and it specifically chose
to feature a photo of me in a korta.
And there was another mailer sent by
another candidate that
implied I was going to kill Jewish New
Yorkers.
>> Part of the earlier conversation we were
having about the Democratic party.
>> Mhm.
>> These are mailers that were sent in a
Democratic primary. M and so if you're a
Jewish New Yorker and you're receiving
these kinds of mailers, you're opening
an article that you're reading and
you're reading this kind of a caricature
of me. I do not begrudge skepticism. I
do not begrudge concern.
And
what I've appreciated about these
conversations is an opportunity to share
who I am and the opinions and thoughts
and commitments that may be in
disagreement with those on the other end
of the table, but at the very least can
show that these are thoughts that are
built on a belief in a universal
system of human rights. It's the
opportunity to make clear that, you
know, I've I've had a number of Jewish
New Yorkers ask me,
you've said you recognize Israel right
to exist, but you won't recognize its
right to exist as a Jewish state. Would
that be the case for
Saudi Arabia? And I've said absolutely
it would be because my belief
>> So your objections remain equal. Yes.
For any Saudi Arabia, UAE as they do to
Israel. for any state, I'm not going to
recognize its right to be a state with a
hierarchy of citizenship on the basis
whether it be of religion or race. And
part of that is because especially as an
American thinking of the importance of a
state which enshrines equal rights
within it
>> and to make clear that my critiques of
Israel are critiques that I would hold
for any other state violating any one of
these other international laws. And the
focus
that I and many other New Yorkers have
had on the question specifically of
Israel's violations of these
international human rights is also in
part because of our unique complicity as
Americans in those violations. You mean
because of the American funding of the
war in Gaza
>> and prior to that and the nature of
sending, you know, $4 billion a year
every year prior to this. One of your
critiques of the Democratic Party, it
feels worth mentioning this here is Pep
progressive except for for Palestinians
and I think given your last answer, I I
understand the argument there that
democratic elected officials have in
your estimation excluded Palestinians
from their sense of a kind of global
universal justice.
You well understand that previous mayors
to you have not put the same emphasis on
Palestinian rights and have I'm thinking
in the case of Mike Bloomberg personally
donated tremendous amounts of money to
social services in Israel or in the case
of Mayor Adams visited Israel. Mayor
Adams ran in 2021 with a promise that he
would retire in the Golden Heights
>> occupied. He he not only visited Israel,
he met with settlement leaders and came
back promising to increase cooperation
with them.
>> Well, we're at this really interesting
moment. There's now a ceasefire,
potentially a peace process. And because
of that history of the way New York City
mayors have treated Israel,
because I I take the critique of
journalists when people say he's running
for mayor, not for leader of the free
world, not for envoy to the Middle East.
But I am curious since you raised it and
since Jewish New Yorkers ask you,
including at Temple Beth Ethohim, I
think on Sunday, which version of Israel
you can support
because of your profound critique of
Israel. I am curious if you can be a
little specific because we are now in
that moment where potentially a new
Middle East may be born. Is there a
version of Israel that you could be
comfortable with and maybe even as
almost all mayors have in the past
visit?
I've said and I and I continue to
believe that one need not visit Israel
to stand up for Jewish New Yorkers. And
I've also said in the question of
visiting countries outside of ours that
my focus is going to be on New York
City. And
my belief whether it be for Israel and
Palestine or anywhere across the world
is the importance of equal rights as
part of any future that we're fighting
for. And
>> as you said, I am running to be the
mayor of the city. And I also know to
your point that there are millions of
New Yorkers, myself included, who care
deeply about Israel and Palestine. And
my desire is to be a mayor who is both
clear in my belief in universal human
rights, the necessity of extending those
beliefs of freedom and safety and
justice and equality to all people, and
that that must also include
Palestinians.
and that my job in leading the city is
to embody that shared sense of humanity.
>> I'm hearing you say an injustice
anywhere is essentially an injustice to
everywhere, to everything.
>> Yes, I I would say that that's correct.
And and I think what's what's been gling
to many in this city has been the
ability to be blind to certain
injustices.
>> We have a mayor right now
who has often been blind to the
suffering of many in this city,
especially I would say Palestinian New
Yorkers. I met a Palestinian New Yorker
from Bay Ridge about two weeks ago. It's
an older man walked with a cane.
>> Mhm.
>> We were having chai in Atoria
and he told me how he'd lived in this
city for decades. He's from Gaza and for
decades he worked to save up to build a
house in Gaza. Mhm.
>> And he built that house and it was the
pride and joy of his life. And the
Israeli military destroyed that house in
one minute. And in the rubble of that
house lay the dreams that he had held
for decades. And how his son
and his grandkids were in Gaza, continue
to be in Gaza today. And he told me
about how his son called him the other
week and said,
"Listen, listen to my son." He gave the
phone over to this man's grandchild and
the grandchild said, "I'm hungry. Can
you send me anything?" And this man had
to grapple with the fact that there was
nothing more he could send. There was no
way he could reach out. This is a New
Yorker.
>> I'm just noting the emotion in your
voice here. it because I think there's
no other way to respond to to this kind
of despair and to hold this despair and
say that as the mayor of your city, I
see what you are struggling through and
the very least you deserve as someone
who looks at you with the full humanity
you deserve. And that's what I want to
bring is as a real belief in a shared
sense of humanity for all because for
far too long there have been exceptions
that have been carved out.
[Music]
We'll be right back.
Even if you're able to convince all
these constituencies that you are the
right candidate to be mayor in this
general election, a safe candidate, more
than safe, desirable,
the argument can be made that there is
because of President Trump something
profoundly unsafe in theory about your
election, entirely out of your control,
which is that if you're elected, and
Trump said this, he'll target New York,
he'll target you. The pretense might be
crime. It might be illegal immigration.
I think you've used this word. It's an
inevitability if you become elected.
Can you understand why that might be a
complicating factor in people's decision
to vote for you? As unfair as it would
be to you, what I've described as
inevitability is Donald Trump's desire
to send the National Guard to New York
City. And what I would say to those who
would say this argument, whomever they
may be,
>> wherever they may be,
>> whatever former governor,
>> whatever former governor, whoever you
know, Andrew Coma living in Westchester
may be, um, is that
Donald Trump is not waiting for me to be
the mayor to enact this kind of
political retribution. He had arguably
the most collaborative mayor he could
find in Eric Adams. And even with that
mayor, he pulled $80 million out of a
city bank account. He suspended $50
million in funding because the city
refused to give up,
>> but kept the National Guard at bay.
>> Yes. While
looking to suspend $18 billion in
federal infrastructure funding in no
small part
because of Democrats at the national
level refusing to allow him to throw 4
million Americans off of their
healthcare. My point being that
retribution is not something that will
only appear in this city by virtue of my
being mayor. It's already a feature of
what it looks like to live on in Donald
Trump's America.
>> And what we've seen, whether it be in
his first administration or now in his
second administration, is that Donald
Trump, if you want to stand up to him,
the first thing you have to do is be
able to actually be willing to fight
him. And what we have in this moment
is not just my campaign, but Andrew
Cuomo's, which is one that is so unable
to stand up to him in large part because
of the fact that he knows his narrow
path to city hall is paved by the very
donors who gave us Donald Trump's second
term, which is why there's there's
overlap. When he was asked would he
condemn Donald Trump for the
weaponization of justice in the
prosecution of Attorney General Tish
James, he said condemn him for what? He
released a statement on the
weaponization that refused to name
either Donald Trump or Tish James. And
so my my point being there already
exists retribution here in this city the
likes of which that has immense
consequences. We have a candidate who is
running on the promise of being able to
stand up to Trump while he can't even
name him. And what I will do is no doubt
face these kinds of threats, including
those that have been made about
deporting me, arresting me,
denaturalizing me.
>> I will face them knowing that just by
virtue of Donald Trump saying something,
it doesn't make it law. What actually
makes it law is when we go through the
court system. And what we've seen is a
approach in California where the
attorney general, the mayor of LA, the
governor of the state came together to
file a lawsuit that where a federal
judge recently found in their favor the
deployment of the National Guard was
illegal. And also an attorney general
who found that for every dollar that
they spent on legal fees, they were able
to recover more than 30,000 in federal
funds that would have otherwise been
stripped of them. Ultimately, a major
reason why Trump might intervene in New
York would be part of an ICE campaign to
round up and deport undocumented
immigrants. That's been an argument
pretense he's made in several places
where the National Guard eventually
comes. There are an estimated 400,000
undocumented immigrants in New York. And
as you found as you ran this primary
that was so successful and you met with
many Trumpup supporting New Yorkers who
have turned around and supported you is
that their viewpoint on these issues is
complicated and many of them have
serious objections to the level of
undocumented immigration in a place like
New York City.
But I don't hear from your campaign that
you're going to be participating in any
Trump-led effort to detain, deport
undocumented immigrants.
Why not?
I'm not looking to assist Donald Trump
in his attempt to fulfill his campaign
promise to create the single largest
deportation force in American history.
I'm not looking to do so because even if
you know that some of your maybe perhaps
many of your supporters do want illegal
immigration to be treated differently
than it has. What I've heard from my
supporters and what I've heard from New
Yorkers, frankly, is a desire for
dignity. And in looking at what ICE's
presence has been in New York City, what
it has meant for our city, seeing at the
very least an absence of that, and in
fact an attack not only on the question
of dignity, by the very fabric of the
city, right? Where there are New Yorkers
I know of who took down the numbers on
every apartment on their floor so that
ICE wouldn't know where anyone lived.
>> Wow. I spoke to a Dominican barber shop
owner in Harlem who told me that all of
his barbers have legal status and they
are terrified of coming to work. A
general sense of the hollowing out of
the immigrant hubs of this city. And no,
I'm not going to help Donald Trump in
doing so. I'm in fact going to fight
Donald Trump when he looks to tear
families apart. And I'm going to do so
because I know what the stakes are. When
when he detains a six-year-old girl from
Queens and deports her, I know that her
principal is writing a letter to ICE
saying, "Please don't do this."
>> I mean, here you're saying the method
can't be separated from the goal, and
you're rejecting the method because
you're rejecting the goal. I mean,
that's that's very clear.
>> I I think also I reject the goal. It's
not just the the manner in which this
detention is happening. It's the fact
that the the goal here is cruelty. The
goal is to rip these families apart and
the goal is to attack so much of what is
the foundation of this city as an
immigrant city.
>> Would you ever meet with President Trump
in the hope that you could defang this
person, this president who may have ill
will toward you, but frankly doesn't
really know you at all.
>> Absolutely. I will meet with President
Trump. I think it's incumbent upon any
mayor of this city to meet with the
president of the country. What I won't
do is work with President Trump at the
expense of the city. That's that's the
critique that I've made of of Andrew
Cuomo and of Eric Adams is that their
conversations with Trump have more to do
with themselves than to do with the
people of the city. It's not that
they're talking,
>> it's that who are they talking to him
about.
>> I want to end this conversation on the
movement that you've quite clearly
created in New York City. It's a
movement we saw on vivid display last
night that argues that the democratic
politics of the modern era, the old
formulas, I that word resonated last
night when you said it, have failed and
that you can replace it with something
new. And in your speech at this rally we
all went to, you likened it to the great
movements of American history, civil
rights movement, the movement for labor
rights that created the modern weekend
where workers can take a break, the New
Deal and the birth of the social safety
net.
That sets expectations pretty high. I'm
not sure you can get much higher and
there's nobility in that and there's
real risk in that. And so do you worry
that it will be hard to deliver on those
expectations?
You're pretty new to management on this
scale.
And if it's impossible or even really
difficult to deliver, what does it do to
this movement?
I'm glad I won't have to answer the
hypothetical because I fully intend to
deliver and we have to. We came to these
policies, to these commitments not
because of a poll that we commissioned
or a consultant that we sat with.
>> In fact, the polls said that you should
focus on public safety.
>> Not also had me tied with someone else.
>> Literally,
>> literally anybody else and I beat that
guy.
But I I I I say this to say that it's
New Yorkers who told us it was housing.
It's New Yorkers who told us it was
childare. It's New Yorkers who told us
it was the slowest buses in America.
And the necessity of fulfilling these
commitments are also to ensure that
those New Yorkers stay New Yorkers. They
continue to see themselves in this city.
And the only way we can do so is if they
see their struggles in our politics.
And
there are many politicians who will tell
you that the best life could ever be is
the one that you're living in right now.
And those are also the ones who have
paved the way for the politics we've
seen of Donald Trump because you have to
be able to reckon with the material
needs of working people and the fact
that so many of them are going unmet.
>> Right. Sounds like you're saying, "I
know what I believe. I'm not going to
compromise on my values and my
administration will not compromise on my
values and that will be enough." This is
like my translator.
>> Perhaps it will be enough.
>> Assemblyman Zoron,
>> Mr. Mr. Mandani, thank you very much for
your time.
>> Thank you very much. It's a pleasure.
>> Good luck to you.
>> Thank you. Same to you.
>> Oh, yes. Well, we're doing a quick
interview photo.
>> Yes. Should we do one of those
politician handshakes or no?
>> No, no, no, no.
Later tonight, Zoron Mandani will
participate in the first general
election debate of the mayor's race,
where he'll face off against Andrew
Cuomo, now running as an independent,
and Curtis Siwa, a Republican. The
debate begins at 700 p.m.
We'll be right back.
Here's
what else you need to know today. The
Times reports that the Trump
administration has secretly authorized
the CIA to conduct covert action in
Venezuela, a major escalation in its
campaign against the country's
authoritarian leader, Nicholas Madura.
The US military has already been
destroying boats off Venezuela's coast
that it claims are transporting drugs.
And in private conversations, US
officials are now making it clear that
their end goal is to drive Maduro from
power.
And in oral arguments on Wednesday, the
Supreme Court's conservative majority
appeared ready to challenge a key
provision of the Voting Rights Act of
1965 by prohibiting state lawmakers from
using race as a factor in drawing
election maps. If the court decides that
race may not be used in such maps, it
could allow Republican legislators to
eliminate at least a dozen Democratic
held house seats across the South.
[Music]
Today's episode was produced by OA
Cherved, Mary Wilson, Jessica Chung, and
Mujade. It was edited by Paige Cowat and
Brendan Clinkenberg. contains music by
Alicia,
Dan Powell, and Marian Lozano, and was
engineered by Alyssa Moxley.
[Music]
That's it for the daily. I'm Michael.
See you tomorrow.
[Music]